---
layout: post
title: OData and RESTier
subtitle: Is it really the best way to REST?
image: /img/hello_world.jpeg
tags: [backend, .net]
---

Actually I prefer using *Spring Framework* (especially *Boot*) for any enterprise project involving backend services. But in the last few months, we're developing a government project in which it's clearly declared that the software have to be developed using .Net Framework (yes! not even .Net Core). Since I'm not quite familiar with the .Net ecosystem for a while, I had to spend a good amount of time on choosing the best possible backend stack on .Net framework. 

Unfortunately I had a strong intuition that the .Net ecosystem is in a chaotic state. First of all, [here](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/net-core-is-the-future-of-net/) Scott Hunter (*Director Program Management, .NET*) states that .Net Framework isn't recommended to be used in new projects, which makes sense since the future of .Net platform is .Net Core. But when I started to explore the libraries during the development process, I saw that some of the libraries that I intended to use are not supported for .Net framework. On the other hand, I also noticed that some of the older libraries don't support .Net core at all. Building software on such an unstable foundation feels uncomfortable for sure.

I searched for the best way to generating a CRUD REST API supporting paging, sorting etc. with minimal boilerplate code. First I checked the builtin tools that comes with Visual Studio. I tried to generate controller code for my models using *Web API 2 Controller with actions, using Entity Framework* option. That automatically generates code for standart CRUD operations, but that's all. No paging, sorting or filtering. I still have to implement all those features. After searching for a better way, I ended up with a protocol called **OData** which is driven by Microsoft. The slogan of the project is quite motivating *the best way to REST!*. Here's the description from the project page itself : 

> OData (Open Data Protocol) is an ISO/IEC approved, OASIS standard that defines a set of best practices for building and consuming RESTful APIs. OData helps you focus on your business logic while building RESTful APIs without having to worry about the various approaches to define request and response headers, status codes, HTTP methods, URL conventions, media types, payload formats, query options, etc. OData also provides guidance for tracking changes, defining functions/actions for reusable procedures, and sending asynchronous/batch requests.

Well, that looks quite promising. After checking the documentation for a while I loved the paradigm. It feels like a *GraphQL* competitor with less boilerplate code. Although there is a basic vanilla OData implementation for .Net with scaffolding capabilities built right into Visual Studio, I didn't stop here and searched whether there are better implementations of OData. I ended up with **RESTier** project again from the Microsoft OData team. It's another layer over OData .Net which is even more developer friendly. 

> RESTier is a RESTful API development framework for building standardized, OData V4 based RESTful services on .NET platform. It can be seen as a middle-ware on top of Web API OData. RESTier provides facilities to bootstrap an OData service like what WCF Data Services (which is sunset) does, beside this, it supports to add business logic in several simple steps, has flexibility and easy customization like what Web API OData do. It also supports to add additional publishers to support other protocols and additional providers to support other data sources.

That's totally appetizing. Although the release date trends or the star counts of the project isn't so promising, it looks like RESTier is my best bet for .Net. After checking the [RESTier documentation](http://odata.github.io/RESTier/) and understanding the general architecture I loved it. It supports CRUD operations, paging, sorting, filtering, transparent security, row and action based authorization rules by intercepting and even eagerly expanding related sub entity fields out of the box with just a few lines of configuretion code.
